what's up everybody it's Travis here
from Travis dot media today is going to
be a little different I have no notes I
have no outline today I want to share my
unconventional self-taught coding story
now I know what you might be thinking
what does this guy think he's a
celebrity or something like we care
about his life no I don't I've been all
over the world I've never once had
somebody be like hey you're that guy
from YouTube Travis media never once
only one time in Hong Kong this lady was
like are you Chris Martin from Coldplay
and I was like what Chris Martin I'm
Travis media and she was like who and I
was like but when I was learning the
code one thing that really really helped
me was listening to other people who
made it other people who did that and
were way ahead of me so I was learning
to code I was facing a lot of struggles
juggling time juggling my job and my
family and the struggles of learning to
code and then eventually trying to get
the job finding work facing imposter
syndrome all of those things and I would
listen to other people's stories and
would learn from them and would get
encouragement from their lows and their
highs and their tips and tricks so I
feel like many of you are in the same
boat you're learning to code or you're
somewhere along that journey and you
just need some encouragement and so
that's why I'm making it today I want to
share my journey to help you on yours so
as always grab some coffee I don't have
my tea I think it's in the other room
grab some coffee grab some tea make some
time kick back and find some
encouragement so prior to learning to
code I had no coding encounters I always
thought it was for those really smart
people that had degrees and you had to
be really good at math I could never do
something like that so I never even
attempted it nobody ever told me it was
something I I could do we didn't learn
it in school and it just never crossed
my mind so it's a teenager I worked as a
park ranger a scooped ice cream and I
stocked shelves at Target about 19 I
moved out I got my own apartment and I
started working at a restaurant in fact
I worked at the same restaurant chain in
two different locations so I worked in
the morning at one restaurant in the
kitchen in the evening in another
restaurant same chain in the kitchen and
in between that I worked at a radio
station that's what I really wanted to
do at the time but unless you're a
personality you're not going to make
money in radio right I was at an AM
station I was the afternoon producer I
got to do a couple of shows I got to do
the weather and the sports and all that
cool stuff but I was making like minimum
wage and there was no room for
advancement radio is a tough job so I
worked at that for a while I had three
jobs I got kind of worn out I had saved
a bunch of money and I decided hey I'm
gonna go traveling so I went traveling
internationally I eventually got married
to a wonderful lady and I ended up back
in the city without a job so I went to a
temp agency to take the first job I
could get and they put me at LabCorp now
if you know anything about LabCorp
people take drug tests in the samples
are put in a box along with the
paperwork and sent to us and I'm sitting
there eight hours a day flipping through
these Pages punching in data so I'm a
data entry guy I'm working like five in
the morning to 1 30 and I'm just
flipping through papers and in fact we
didn't even have a full keyboard we just
had the number pad so I'm punching in
data flip the page I punch in some data
I flip the page all day long I did that
for about six months and we found out we
were expecting so we moved back up to
Virginia and again I took the first job
I could get there which was answering
phones at a hospital in a health
information department and the job kind
of sucked but I was like look I'm gonna
stay here six months I'm gonna figure
out what else to do and I'm gonna get
out there I'm gonna get a better job but
I'm gonna do this for a little while to
get on my feet well that's six months
turned into 10 years and many of you
guys may be in that same situation don't
let it happen six months was all I
intended I went from 24 to 34 in that
dead-end job I didn't have any ambition
I didn't have any skill to fall back on
I didn't have anybody to encourage me
and say Hey you have these other skills
or hey you should go this direction or
get this kind of training and do this I
just had the job I was brought up in a
kind of non-entrepreneurial family they
told me to get a job stick with it
retire happy and that's what I thought I
should do so I ended up staying there 10
years I started out answering phones
eventually they were like man this guy
could type so they started let me do
medical transcription they gave me some
easy reports and then I learned the
terminology and I started typing all the
time as a medical transcriptionist and
it was kind of neat it was like the more
you type you can get to this level where
you make extra money so I was making
extra money but it still wasn't a lot I
had a salary I had benefits that was
great but I still wasn't making a lot of
money and eventually just to give me a
little extra pay which wasn't much they
changed my job title to analyst and they
let me do some speech recognition stuff
which wasn't much but I was basically
still typing I just got like another
thousand or two thousand a year and I
was just kind of stuck there but while I
was there I had this idea that I had
things in my head that everybody wanted
to know so I started a Blog and I
started blogging regularly and I had
this WordPress theme that I wanted to
customize and I was like I want to
change this color I want the menu to do
this I want to change this font I didn't
know how to do it so I had to write the
theme company and they would write me
back with some CSS or they'd write me
back with some HTML or some JavaScript
or something to paste in to their theme
and I thought it was the coolest thing
in the world still I didn't think it was
something I could do but I thought it
was neat so I started learning little
Snippets CSS Snippets HTML Snippets
thought it was so great and around that
time frame I got called into my boss's
boss's office and he was like hey Travis
just to let you and your boss know we're
Outsourcing your department in three
months don't say nothing
which is kind of messed up but we're
keeping you and we're keeping your boss
so no worries and I'm thinking sure no
worries after you lay everybody else off
what what happens to us we work another
three months and then we're laid off
I mean transcription work can easily be
outsourced why would they keep me around
much longer so it got me thinking and it
was really the first time in my life
I've been pushed up against the wall
like that I really didn't have any skill
set I had really nothing I could do I
had no past jobs to fall back on I had
no degree I had no path to move forward
I wanted to do something different I
wanted to have a better job but what do
I do I have no skill set when am I going
to go back to the restaurant I'm going
to go back to data entry at LabCorp I
don't have money to go back to college
by this time I was like 33 34 years old
so I started thinking what do I like to
do what is something new and fresh that
I can put my full effort toward and make
this a point in my life that I'm
actually going to shift completely and
succeed at something else I'm actually
going to make some more money and be
happy in my job and I started thinking
you know what I love writing that code
that HTML and CSS that I'm sent or that
CSS that I've learned I love doing that
I wonder if I can learn to code and
switch careers and at the moment and I
was like no way you can't do that
without a degree you can't do that
without math and all this other stuff
but I started Googling around I started
checking YouTube and there were people
doing it so I decided I'm gonna go all
in on this thing if they can do it I can
do it and by that time I had three kids
and I wasn't making a lot of money my
wife was like Travis you gotta do better
you got to bring home some more money
and I just had lots of motivation my
family needs me I need more purpose in
my job I need more money I'm gonna do
this thing
so I decided I couldn't do it on my own
I couldn't just go and learn the stuff I
need to do something drastic so I joined
a boot camp boot camp was super
expensive it was like 15 grand but I was
like I don't care whatever it takes if I
can pay 15 grand change into the
programming career as a like software
developer that's way worth it I'll make
the money back I'll pay that off and so
I did that so I was still at this
company and I decided I'm gonna do this
boot camp it was called block at the
time I think it's been bought out by
another company I don't know the name of
it I don't know if they're still doing
boot camp things but block was like one
of the leading boot camps eight years or
so ago and I joined them and they had
the whole package the front end the back
end they had the mentors and all of the
good stuff the projects the portfolios
they had everything you wanted so I
would work from like eight to five full
day and then by like five o'clock in 30
minutes I was on my computer coding I
took every opportunity to code that I
could I coded right after work for like
an hour hour and a half then I would go
to dinner I'd play with the kids I'd
talk with a wife and then about 10
o'clock I'd get back on the computer for
two or three hours I'd wake up I'd do
the same thing the next day and I would
try to code like 20 hours a week and I
had my family on the same page I told my
wife look this is the big step up for us
I'm gonna do this I just need some
support I need some time to get it done
she was on board the kids were on board
actually they were pretty small so they
didn't know but I made time for coding
very intentional time for coding I cut
out all the weekend fun and I told
everybody look for about six months I'm
gonna be doing this thing I'm gonna be
busy and it's going to change my life
and I got really focused on this Mission
so I joined them I learned HTML thought
it was the best thing in the world
learned CSS fell in love with
programming and then I got the
JavaScript JavaScript was tricky I
really struggled with it at first
because I had no coding background I
really didn't know what I was doing and
we were building this app like this
music player app and the teacher was
just writing all all this code really
fast and and I was you know struggling
to keep up with it and they were writing
all these functions and we were calling
it from other files and I just you know
it was hard and right when I started
getting it they were like let's take
this whole app and refactor it with
jQuery so I had to learn jQuery and I
wrestled with that for a while but I
eventually got it and I still loved it I
still loved coding and seeing things
being built on the web page now around
this time I jumped on upwork I wanted to
make some extra money on the side I
jumped on upwork I created a profile and
I started taking these really menial
jobs like people were like hey can you
install this theme for me like WordPress
theme and I was like yeah I can do that
for five bucks and then somebody else
would be like I need the color of my
menu changed and I was like yeah I'll do
that for like 10 bucks I did that and I
started getting work on there and I
realized you know what I can kind of
make money with just the front end of
this programming so I finished the front
end track I finished all of that and I
got ready to start the back end of the
boot camp now the back end of the boot
camp was in Ruby on Rails you learn Ruby
then you learned the Ruby on Rails
framework and I started looking in my
area for jobs that used Ruby on Rails
because at that time you didn't have all
the remote jobs you have now everything
was kind of In-House so I started
looking at the hospitals and schools and
warehouses factories things like that in
my area nobody was using Ruby on Rails
so I started thinking why am I going to
learn Ruby on Rails if nobody's using it
and I'm already making money on upwork
and my boot camp is expensive if I stop
like if I drop out halfway into it I can
get half my money back like if I stop
now I get my 8 000 back and so I decided
based on all of that I would just drop
out of the boot camp so I dropped out I
got my money back I immediately started
learning WordPress in PHP development so
I got a WordPress course on udemy and
learned PHP I learned WordPress and
started picking up upwork jobs for
WordPress development now in your
journey you're going to have these
moments where Things fall into place you
don't know when they're gonna happen but
they will happen for me I was on upwork
and I saw this one job ad from this web
agency in Colorado they were looking for
a part-time WordPress developer to come
on board and help like full stack
WordPress developer so I wrote them I
told them all of these things like I'm
this WordPress developer and I did this
boot camp and and here's some things on
GitHub that I've done I'd love to have
this job and they wrote me back and they
said hey I think you'd be a good fit do
you want to join us as a full stack
WordPress developer working part-time it
can be up to 30 hours a week and I was
like absolutely so I took that and I
worked that 30 hours a week while I work
my full-time job now granted everybody
over here and my job had been outsourced
I was having to work double the effort
because people were gone they were like
let's just give it all to Travis and
then over here I was having all this fun
as a real developer working for this
agency so there was a senior developer
and then there was me and they would
assign us work and Assan I think it was
Asana or bitbucket no it was a bit
bucket they were a sign in his work and
we were working on all these WordPress
sites it was so much fun and I was
making you know enough money so I
decided hey I'm I'm just going to leave
this job it's uncertain I shouldn't have
been here for 10 years I finally found
some kind of Direction in my life
career-wise I'm out of here so I quit
that job and I started working for this
company and I learned a lot and I was so
new to it right I was learning while I
was working like this one ticket I was
supposed to take the gravity forms
plug-in and add this hook to where it
sent an email when somebody submits the
thing and I remember thinking like I
don't know even where to begin and I
talked to the senior developer and he
was like oh here's some documentation
here's how you do it and I just sat
there for like hours and hours like now
even knowing where to start I eventually
told him I can't do it he wrote it it
was like 25 lines of code and for me it
was like how did he even come up with
that that's mind-blowing that he could
even do that now I'll look back and I'm
like that's easy like why couldn't I why
couldn't I do that but I was learning as
I was going so I was playing the
Imposter I was taking the tasks that
were super hard and I was getting most
of them done that one I just mentioned I
couldn't do it was only one or two of
those but most of the things I did it
and he would tell me hey this code you
can refactor it this way and was very
gracious toward me so I was really
thankful for that job at the same time I
was picking up more work on upwork I
started building websites for people and
those people would come back to me hey
we need this fixed too and when they did
I would say hey let's take it off of
upwork because upwork charge is a 20 fee
so I would get that client I'd do the
work for them then when they came back I
would take them off of upwork so I had
the upwork work and then I had the work
going on outside of upwork and I reached
out to a local web agency in my area
asked them if they had overflow work and
they did so they started sending me work
too so I had good steady work going on
but I wasn't making still a lot of money
I was making more than at the company
but when you combine the lack of health
insurance and all of those things and
there's no vacation time things like
that I was probably making the same but
I was free over here I wasn't having to
go into the office I was able to stay
home I was able to do things that I like
to do now I did this for two years I
freelanced for two years and while doing
that I started documenting my journey on
the blog so if you go to travis.media
and go to my oldest posts you'll see the
very first one is when I started the
boot camp and I just went through here
the things I'm learning here's where I'm
at and I documented my journey I've
still been writing new things that I'm
learning but I also started to do
YouTube I started to explain topics that
I was learning and they're really really
bad quality like if you go back to my
early videos it's like me in a closet
like my kids were playing everybody was
being loud so I'd go in the closet and
I'd be like in this video I'm going to
tell you what that e means in JavaScript
hey everybody Travis here with another
video and I want to talk real quick
about what that little e is passed as a
parameter in JavaScript functions it's
really bad but I was consistent with
that I was freelancing and I was
creating content in the form of blogging
and youtubing and I did that for two
years
but after a while with freelancing if
you don't bring anybody on board to help
you out you get caught up in all of this
administrative stuff so I was coding
like 30 30 of the time the rest of the
time I'm on the phone I'm writing
proposals or I'm budgeting or sending
out some invoices and I kind of got
tired of that I started thinking I just
want to code I just want to sit down and
code and not have to deal with all this
administrative stuff and at that time I
realized that a lot of people were
working from home and maybe it's time
for me to get back into the corporate
space as a software engineer I can make
more money I could still work from home
I could have benefits and so I decided
to do that I looked on LinkedIn I
started applying for jobs I started
sending out my resume had some coding
interviews some went well some didn't
completely bombed some coding exams but
this one company reached out and asked
if I could speak to their senior
developer he could go over kind of what
their technology is and talk to me and
find out kind of where I'm at so I met
with the senior developer of this
company and he basically showed me their
app here's their app and here's all the
templates this is what we're building
this is how we do things and I kind of
just yeah oh that's great oh yeah I like
that I asked questions and we kind of
hit it off and then he said here's our
Ruby on Rails app it's a data app and we
pull all of this data and we send it all
back to Wordpress and populate the page
and it was golf.com by the way so it's
this monstrous site run on WordPress so
there are all these templates they
really did a good job of putting it
together but I talked with him and I
really didn't have to do anything I had
to listen to him kind of discuss a
couple of things ask a couple of
questions afterwards when we were
finished he was like well I'll relay all
this back to my boss and we'll get back
to you so I thought nothing of it a
couple of days later the boss called me
and said hey Travis we want to make you
an offer and I was like really we want
to offer you a job job with the company
as a full stack software developer and
then he asked me how much are you
expecting to be paid like what's your
range and I've been preparing for this I
didn't want to ask for too much and
scare them away but I didn't want to ask
for too little I'm already making this
much I want to make more than that so I
thought a good conservative answer was
like 60 though so I was like 60 000
maybe 65 000 and he was like okay well
I'll get back to you I'll talk to the
team and get back with you and I was
like oh I remember telling my wife like
oh I asked too high they're not going to
call me back well they did call me back
the next day and the guy said this he
said Travis the senior developer liked
you we like your blog content and
YouTube content we see that you're
competent that you like to teach that
you know the material and by the way
that helped me a lot in this scenario
having a Blog having YouTube that
demonstrated that I knew the material I
was able to write about the material I
was able to do the coding on my YouTube
videos and they liked that so if you're
thinking about blogging your journey or
youtubing your journey do
it can't hurt you and it probably will
help you but anyway he said so we talked
about it we want you to stick around we
want to take you on as a developer and
we want you to stay around and grow with
us so we're not going to offer you 60
we're going to offer you 90. and I was
almost passed out in the driveway I was
like what and he said yeah 90 because we
don't want you to come and then find
another job and leave us we want you to
stick around so we're going to offer you
90 000. how was that and I was like you
know where do I sign and so I took this
job stopped my freelancing and this job
introduced me to a lot right we had some
very professional developers I mean it
was golf.com it's a massive site we had
developers that built out all of these
templates and so I learned so much by
how they did that we had a Ruby on Rails
app that pulled data from these apis and
sent it all to Wordpress so that was
neat but what I really learned was the
scrum methodology or agile methodology
so we had daily stand-ups that was new
to me we had a scrum Master we had
stakeholders we had tasks that we were
assigned during our Sprint we also had a
devops team so we had openshift we were
running all these containers we had CI
CD and gitlab these were all new things
so as a freelancer I'm just focused on
WordPress web development in my own
little bubble I get out here and there's
all this new technology technology don't
really get to mess with as a freelancer
a lot of times but here I am all of this
new technology I'm surrounded by these
great programmers there's devops there's
scrum and I'm learning so much well
three to four months into this and this
company does a lot of government work I
was the only person doing the
non-cleared work about three to four
months into this I left this job now the
guy that hired me ended up leaving the
company and the two other people like
ran out of work for me they kept saying
Yeah Monday we're gonna have some new
work for you you're gonna be on a new
team you're gonna be doing this kind of
thing well Monday would come and there's
still be no work so the golf.com thing
ended I didn't have anything else to do
so I ended up taking vacation time I
used all of my vacation time there still
wasn't a job for me yet so I was
thinking this sucks so I was uncertain
where I was going there but all of a
sudden I get this message on LinkedIn
from a company a software company in my
area this is another one of those
moments you don't expect
but you're kind of in the right place at
the right time this guy writes me he's
like hey I'm with this company in your
city I'm looking to hire 30 people I got
this new contract I need 30 people quick
we're a company that likes good people
that can learn the material we don't
want the super smart people that are
hard to work with we see that you know
this technology that you work at this
place and we know that you can learn the
stuff do you want the job
so the guy called me we talked he's a
great guy great company great philosophy
the position though was a site
reliability engineer position which was
brand new to me and I liked the
challenge and I like the devops from my
previous job the devops that I was
exposed to so I decided hey this job
didn't give me any work
this job is very promising it's local
and it's a chance for a raise because
obviously you don't take a new job
without getting a higher salary so I
left this job I started working as a
site reliability engineer now a lot of
us in the contract were new some of the
people were like super smart senior
level and then a couple of us were just
like people they needed quickly so I
worked with one guy he was a electrical
engineer that just coded on the side he
took the job too so me and him kind of
hit it off we both have non-traditional
backgrounds in the first week four of us
okay one guy was really smart the three
of us weren't
four of us were tasked with deploying
the elk stack on a Linux server so that
was new okay I have a Mac I use the Unix
terminal so the Linux terminal wasn't
too bad but the Linux system was brand
new
second we were in the cloud we were in
Azure so I had to go in Azure and be
like what is a VM and third the elk
stack like I thought elk was an animal
but elk is elasticsearch log stash and
Cabana so I had to learn that I had to
learn Linux I had to get in the cloud I
had to learn about SSH public private
Keys all of that stuff right away within
my first week and within a few weeks I
started feeling good about that I
started feeling good in Linux and the
cloud and I got on a contract where
we're deploying containers to kubernetes
that took me months and months to figure
out I actually worked for a couple of
months building Helm charge kind of
copying other people's charts still
didn't know really what was going on I
tried to look at the documentation but a
lot of times in those scenarios you have
to back up and go back to the
foundations like I needed to actually go
back and be like what is a container
learn about containers first but I
couldn't because I was just stuck trying
to move forward too fast so I was
building Helm charts I was kind of
looking at other people's copying what
they're doing deploying having it fail
and
eventually I called on and within a year
of that gig I felt pretty good with
kubernetes I felt really good with
containers the next year I got put on a
new gig with a bunch of really really
talented humble senior developers and we
were in AWS we were the infrastructure
team on that project and we used active
directory for error authentication so
that was new to me and AWS was brand new
to me we were spinning up ec2 instances
using infrastructure as code we were
managing things with SSM it was really
the best learning experience for me I
kind of just sat back of course I did my
work but I kind of just sat back the
whole time and just watched senior
developers at work I did my work I got
things done but the things I learned on
that contract I just can't describe
working around really good developers is
one of the best things you can do
especially if they're humble and they
help you learn and they answer your
questions when needed so I worked in AWS
for about a year I got AWS certified I
learned a lot more about devops after
that was over I got put on a new gig and
in this one I was building an API in.net
and this wasn't just some hobby API like
I've done hobby apis I've built little
small apis at home this one was actually
going to be scaled to hundreds of
thousands of users so it was massive it
had lots of security protocols and it
was another experience where I can say I
was a complete imposter but I came out
of it with a lot more knowledge another
thing I did on that contract is I had to
write a lot of SQL scripts we used SQL
Server which again was new to me SQL
wasn't but anything beyond the sequel
Basics was so I had to learn a lot about
SQL and cursors and functions and all of
that cool stuff transactions and I did
that for about six months but at that
time I started thinking what do I really
want my career to go okay I've been
doing this now for seven years or so
where do I want my career to go now well
I liked coding but I didn't like just
sitting there all day just punching out
code I'm getting too old for that I
could try to become a senior job
developer or get more into consulting or
something like that but I thought I
really love creating content I really
love creating blog posts and YouTube
videos and teaching people new things so
I started looking into it and came
across the developer relations engineer
job and I thought hey that's perfect I
can create content I can engage with the
community and I can still write code so
I apply it at different places I bombed
some interviews because I really didn't
have any experience there but this one
place took a chance on me I did an
interview and for this coding exam I had
to create an API just a basic API that
had a serious security flaw in it and to
create that flaw and then I had to
containerize it and then I had to write
a blog post on the problem it has and
then how it would be fixed like what
code should I change what should I do to
fix this security flaw so I did that I
wrote it I thought it was really good I
sent it in and they liked it and they
said hey we like the way you wrote we
thought you explained it well and we
want to offer you the job so that's
where I'm currently at I'm currently a
developer relations engineer and I love
it I'm able to create content I'm able
to engage with the community I'm able to
go to conferences and travel and I'm
also still able to code and write
scripts and all of that fun stuff and
I'm at a place in my career where I can
do that where I can sit back and say
what do I want to do next devrel is
where I wanted to go next and in this
economy I could be laid off anytime they
could let me go and I have to find
something else that's the nature of
things now but look if you've made it
this far thanks for sticking with me I
hope you found some encouragement I hope
you found some nugget of some sort to
get you out of the next slump you might
be in and next week I'm going to release
another video kind of related to this
about the top eight things that I've
learned in my eight years as a software
engineer so I started learning to code
at 34 and this year I'll be 42. so be
sure you look out for that video it's
going to be next week go ahead and
subscribe if you haven't click the Bell
to be notified whenever that's released
but I hope you found this video helpful
if so or if you have any questions then
be sure to leave a comment below if you
did find it helpful consider clicking
that like button and as always I'll see
you in the next video
[Music]
all right